Add vertical mixing coefficients module (#310)
E3SM-Project/Omega: components/omega/doc/devGuide/VerticalMixingCoeff.md

# Vertical Mixing Coefficients

Omega includes a `VertMix` class that provides functions that compute `VertDiff` and `VertVisc`, the
vertical diffusivity and viscosity, where both are defined at the top of cell centers. Currently the
values of `VertDiff` and `VertVisc` are calculated using the linear combination of three options: (1) a
constant background mixing value, (2) a convective instability mixing value, and (3) a Richardson
number dependent shear mixing value from the [Pacanowski and Philander (1981)](https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/phoc/11/11/1520-0485_1981_011_1443_povmin_2_0_co_2.xml) parameterization. These options are linearly
additive. In the future, additional additive options will be implemented, such as the K Profile Parameterization [(KPP; Large et al., 1994)](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/94rg01872). For both the convective and shear mixing values `BruntVaisalaFreq` is needed, which
is calculated by the `EOS` class.

## Initialization and Usage

The primary class `VertMix` is implemented using the Singleton pattern to ensure a single instance manages all vertical mixing calculations.

```c++
// Initialize VertMix

> VertMix* vertMix = VertMix::getInstance("Default", mesh, nLevels);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VertMix* VMix = VertMix::getInstance();
```

// Compute mixing coefficients
vertMix->computeVertMix(VertDiff, VertVisc, NormalVelocity,

>                        TangentialVelocity, BruntVaisalaFreq);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VMix->computeVertMix(NormalVelocity,
                       TangentialVelocity, BruntVaisalaFreq);
```

```

## Configuration

The initialization process reads parameters from the yaml configuration file with the following structure and
default values:

```yaml
VertMix:
  Background:
    Viscosity: 1e-4
    Diffusivity: 1e-5
  Convective:
    Enable: true
    Diffusivity: 1.0
    TriggerBVF: 0.0
  Shear:
    Enable: true
    NuZero: 0.005
    Alpha: 5.0
    Exponent: 2.0
```

## Class Structure

### Core Data Members

- `VertDiff`: 2D array storing vertical diffusivity coefficients (m²/s)
- `VertVisc`: 2D array storing vertical viscosity coefficients (m²/s)

### Mixing Parameters

1. Background Mixing:
   - `BackDiff`: Background vertical diffusivity (m²/s; Default: 1e-5)
   - `BackVisc`: Background vertical viscosity (m²/s: Default: 1e-4)

2. Convective Mixing:
   - `EnableConvMix`: Flag to enable/disable convective mixing (Default: True)
   - `ConvDiff`: Convective mixing coefficient (m²/s; Default: 1.0)

>    - `ConvTriggerBVF`: Trigger threshold for convective mixing (Default: < 0.0)

Reviewer 2: should we be more specific on the default here?  Maybe specify something like -1e-8 or some small negative?

Author: Oh, yea, it should be just `0.0` not `< 0.0`. I'll change that.

3. Shear Mixing:
   - `EnableShearMix`: Flag to enable/disable shear mixing (Default: True)
   - `ShearNuZero`: Base coefficient for Pacanowski-Philander scheme (Default: 0.005)
   - `ShearAlpha`: Alpha parameter for P-P scheme (Default: 5.0)
   - `ShearExponent`: Exponent parameter for P-P scheme (Default: 2.0)

## Core Functionality (Vertical Mixing Coefficient Calculation)

The main computation is handled by:

```cpp
void computeVertMix(Array2DReal VertDiff,
                   Array2DReal VertVisc,
                   const Array2DReal &NormalVelocity,
                   const Array2DReal &TangentialVelocity,

>                    const Array2DReal &BruntVaisalaFreq);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
void computeVertMix(
                   const Array2DReal &NormalVelocity,
                   const Array2DReal &TangentialVelocity,
                   const Array2DReal &BruntVaisalaFreq);
```

(omega-dev-vertmix) =

# Vertical Mixing Coefficients

Omega includes a `VertMix` class that provides functions that compute `VertDiff` and `VertVisc`, the
vertical diffusivity and viscosity, where both are defined at the top of cell centers. Currently the

> values of `VertDiff` and `VertVisc` are calculated using the combination of three options: (1) a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
values of `VertDiff` and `VertVisc` are calculated using the linear combination of three options: (1) a
```

constant background mixing value, (2) a convective instability mixing value, and (3) a Richardson

> number dependent shear mixing value based upon Pacanowski and Philander (1981). These options are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
number dependent shear mixing value from the Pacanowski and Philander (1981) parameterization. These options are
```

Reviewer 2: also consider linking to the original paper here or the cvmix docs

additive. For both the convective and shear mixing values `BruntVaisalaFreq` is needed, which
is calculated by the `EOS` class. Currently, the `VertMix` class is set up to have two enumerations,

> `PP` and `KPP`, where the first only uses the three options listed above and the second uses the K Profile Parameterization [(KPP; Large et al., 1994)](https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/94rg01872). The `KPP` option is not yet functional (it will throw an error if used), but the framework for its development have been added here.

Reviewer 2: this may be out of scope here, but will KPP also be additive?  We likely want cases with KPP in the OSBL, conv instability and background below.  The text suggests you only get all three with PP as the option

Author: Yes, I was planning for KPP to be additive as well, but wasn't sure if we wanted to keep the KPP stuff in this PR yet, so didn't go into detail. I will edit the text to reflect the fact that all of them are additive.

## VertMix Type

> An enumeration listing of the schemes is provided (`KPP` is not yet functional). It needs to be extended every time a `VertMix` type is added. It is used to identify which VertMix method is to be used at run time.

Reviewer 3: See prev comment on whether VertMixType is needed

```c++

> enum class VertMixType { PP, KPP };

Reviewer 2: type PP may not be the best name.  It implies you only get PP81 shear mixing.  I'm also unclear why we need an enum type here for PP vs KPP.  Couldn't we have one vertmix class that has methods for PP, KPP, etc..?  Maybe this will become clearer further down.

Author: Yup, I think yours and Phil's comments make sense and I will get rid of the different classes and just combine them all. This will automatically get rid of the PP naming as well.

   - `BackVisc`: Background vertical viscosity (m²/s: Default: 1e-4)

2. Convective Mixing:
   - `EnableConvMix`: Flag to enable/disable convective mixing (Default: True)
   - `ConvDiff`: Convective mixing coefficient (m²/s; Default: 1.0)
   - `ConvTriggerBVF`: Trigger threshold for convective mixing (Default: < 0.0)

3. Shear Mixing:
   - `EnableShearMix`: Flag to enable/disable shear mixing (Default: True)
   - `ShearNuZero`: Base coefficient for Pacanowski-Philander scheme (Default: 0.005)
   - `ShearAlpha`: Alpha parameter for P-P scheme (Default: 5.0)
   - `ShearExponent`: Exponent parameter for P-P scheme (Default: 2.0)

## Core Functionality (Vertical Mixing Coefficient Calculation)

The main computation is handled by:

```cpp
void computeVertMix(Array2DReal VertDiff,
                   Array2DReal VertVisc,
                   const Array2DReal &NormalVelocity,
                   const Array2DReal &TangentialVelocity,
                   const Array2DReal &BruntVaisalaFreq);
```

This method combines the effects of:
- Background mixing (constant coefficients)
- Convective mixing (triggered by static instability)

> - Shear mixing (Pacanowski-Philander scheme)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Shear instability driven mixing (Pacanowski-Philander scheme)
```
